Chapter 16 - Decision Trees	2
The Agony of Choice	2
16.1 – Introduction	2
16.2 - Pros and cons of Decision Trees	3
16.3 – Gini Impurity Index - Theory	4
16.4 – Gini Impurity Index - Example	5
16.4 – Gini Gain - Party Game Example	6
16.5 – Gini Gain - Synthetic Cancer Risk Data	7
16.6 – Gini Gain - Finding the best split within a variable	8
16.7 - Entropy and Information Theory	11
16.8 - A deeper relationship between information and physical reality	17
16.9 - Information Gain in decision trees	18
16.10 - Building the decision tree	19
16.11 - Pruning	20
16.12 - Pruning by information gain	20
16.13 - Reduced Error Pruning (REP)	20
16.14 - Cost-complexity pruning	20
16.15 - Combining decision trees - Random Forests	21
16.16 - Conclusions	21
16.17 - Notebooks	22
16.18 - References	22

 
Chapter 16 - Decision Trees
The Agony of Choice
16.1 – Introduction
A decision tree is a classification algorithm where a hierarchical sequence of decisions will determine the predicted output of the algorithm. Each decision operates on single input variable, comparing the value of that input variable to pretrained split value. This comparison will direct the decision tree algorithm into one of 2 (or more) branches, where a different decision rule is applied, and so on. Any input will traverse the tree along some path to a terminating node associated with an outcome value or label is reached. The decision rules are learned (estimated) during training. This branching into different decision paths from a common starting point rightfully earns the algorithm the name decision tree, as the paths resemble the branch (or roots) or a tree. As an example, in a decision tree predicting the risk of a certain cancer with a hereditary component, the first decision rule can be whether the patient has a family history of the cancer in question. If so, we traverse down to one of the two children of the current node. If not, we traverse the other, until we exhausted all the rules and end up with a decision or prediction. In decision trees, the rules are commonly referred to as splits. Building the tree thus means determining what are the optimal splits of our data, and in what order.  

	 	
	Figure 16.1 - Choose your own data science adventure decision tree	

16.2 - Pros and cons of Decision Trees
Decision trees are traditionally seen as machine learning algorithms that are best applied to categorical data. This appears to be somewhat of a misperception, as the metrics used by the algorithms are equally applicable to both categorical and numerical inputs. What is true is that decision trees are inherently used as classifiers. Getting a decision tree to do regression is possible in principle, but numerical methods offer more efficient solutions. The strength of decision trees is threefold. First, decision models are quite intuitive and transparent. We see how decision are made, and it what order. Reminiscent of early knowledge-based systems with their cascade of [if…then] rules, the decision tree gives us an explanatory path from input to decision. Second, unlike some of the numeral classifiers we have already discussed (like logistic regression), the decision tree has an implicit ranking of the regressors in terms of importance. Important variables for making the correct decision are considered first, while noisy, non-predictive regressors end up further down the tree if they make it at all (see the section on pruning). Third, the entire algorithm is usually completely non-parametric. In principle, there is no need to set learning rate, batch size or regularization terms or other parameters that require tuning to find the optimal result (however, see the section on pruning). 
	However, decision trees can be computationally expensive to compute if there are many regressors. Although at each split the number of data points considered by subsequent nodes decreases, each node still needs to consider all possible split over all the regressors, even those that have already been used. Second, the cascading effect of splitting the data makes the algorithm quite sensitive to noise. Decisions near the root, when based on noisy data determine the entire structure of the resulting tree. Therefore, a small amount of noise can dramatically change the order in which decision rules are considered, the algorithm can't quite recover from these early erroneous decisions. Luckily, there are ways to not only mitigate but also take advantage of this phenomenon, using ensemble methods we shall encounter at the end of this chapter. 

	
 
	(16.1)
	Equation 16.1 - Gini Impurity Index. If a sample, representing some split or predicted outcome, only contains examples of a single class, the impurity will always be 0. This is because in all cases, p(i) is 0 (for classes that are not in data) or p(i) = 1, the probability of the only class in the data. The theoretical maximum Gini impurity is derived below.  	

16.3 – Gini Impurity Index - Theory
So, how do we decide what the most optimal split is, given our current data? But perhaps first, what do we mean by optimal split to begin with? An optimal split occurs when we split the data by thresholding on some input variable x such that most if not all the data belonging to a specific outcome of y end up on one side of the split, while the other possible outcome of y ends up on the other side. To quantify this, we will turn to the Gini index of impurity, as detailed in Equation 16.1. This index provides a measure of how homogenous a data set is, in terms of some outcome. If a dataset contains only datapoints belonging to a single class, it has maximum purity. On the other hand, if all classes are equally represented in the data, it has the highest amount of impurity. You should equation 16.1 as follows: the Gini impurity of a set of points is sum of the probability of each class multiplied by its compliment (1-p) across all classes. The probability of each class is simply the fraction of points that are assigned that class label. Looking at some examples will demonstrate more clearly what the impurity measures is capturing. 

16.4 – Gini Impurity Index - Example
Below are 7 scenarios. The first, we only see one class (red) in our 16 data points. Below, we gradually increase the number of examples for the other class (blue) until they are completely balanced. Notice how the Gini impurity increase from 0 to 0.5. After that, shifting further to have more blue than red examples decrease the Gini impurity back to 0. For a binary classification problem, the theoretical upper bound of the impurity is 0.5. Should we three different classes, it will be 0.666. For m different classes, we find that the theoretical limit is can easily be derived from the fact that it is highest if all classes of m are equally represented in y. Equal represented means equal probability, and equal probability across m classes is 1/m since m∙1/m  = 1. Plugging this fraction into equation 16.1 yields equation 16.2, Which simplifies to equation 16.3.

 16.4 – Gini Gain - Party Game Example
So, what does the Gini impurity have to do with building a decision tree? Imagine I am in room with a 100 strangers, and I am asked to separate these individuals into two groups, based on age, based on a single observable characteristic. All the people that I label as 50 or older, I tell to move to the right side of the room, all the people younger than 50 should make their way to the left side of room. Without using any of their characteristics that can I observe, my guess on whether they are 50 years or older should be chance. 
	
 
		(16.2)
	
 
		 	(16.3)
	Equations 16.2 and 16.3  - The theoretical upper limit to the Gini impurity is a function of the number of distinct classes.		

If somebody gives you nothing more than a name of a person, you would be hard-pressed to accurately predict their age (of course, names do change in popularity over time, so you wouldn't be completely in the dark, but for the sake of this example, ignore that). I know that roughly 50% of the individuals in the room are indeed younger than 50, and the rest 50 or older. If I were to compute the Gini impurity index on this, it would be high. All in all, not a situation we or our machine learning algorithm wants to be in. Now, I am allowed to use that single observable feature to move people either to the left or right side. I pick whether their hair has a decent amount of gray (let us not split hairs over what counts as a decent amount....). When I use that to move people around, I end up with roughly 50 people on one side, and roughly 50 people on the other side of the room. But did I sort them correctly based on their age? A quick survey amongst the participants reveals that we have done well. Only 4 members were incorrectly predicted to be older than 50, and another 4 individuals were incorrectly predicted to be younger than 50. That is an accuracy of 92%, not bad at all. We can also compute the Gini index again, now for both groups that were created by the split based on hair color. This reveals that both groups are highly homogenous, as they contain almost exclusively one class (in both groups, 46 of the 50 individuals are of same class). And a highly homogenous sampling yields a low Gini impurity (or high Gini purity). Relative to the 
	 	 	
		 	
	 	 	
		 	
	 	 	
		 	
	 	 	
		 	
	 	 	
		 	
	 	 	
		 	
	 	 	
		 	
	Figure 16.2 - As the heterogeneity of the sample is captured by the Gini impurity index.	

situation before the split when we had a high Gini impurity, after it, we now have two groups with low Gini impurity. This lower impurity / higher purity is referred to as a Gini Gain, and it is what we optimize for when trying to find the best split possible within a variable, and across variables. In this specific example, we used a categorical variable to split the data. But we can use a continuous variable as well. In that case, we will look for the optimal value to split on, for example if the number of gray hairs make up at least 40% of a person’s hair.

16.5 – Gini Gain - Synthetic Cancer Risk Data
We can put these ideas into practice quite easily. I’ve created two small synthetic data sets on cancer risk that are used in the demo notebooks, and which we will use here to work through as well. Specifically, both data sets have 4 regressors: age, gender, a person's favorite color and the presence of the BRAC1/2 genes, associated with an outcome of whether that individual developed breast cancer at some point. The data set is an exaggeration to further build up an intuition for Gini impurity. Again, the data is also purely fictional, please don’t read into too much. 
	 	
	Figure 16.3 - Computing the best split in our cancer data set for the variable 'sex assigned at birth'. 		
16.6 – Gini Gain - Finding the best split within a variable
With these three regressors we need to find the best possible split across all inputs and across all input variables. Which of the input variables yields the highest Gini Gain when split on its most optimal point? This process starts with computing the optimal split for each variable in turn. We should start there. Our input data can be both categorical and numerical. How many ways can we split a variable? As many ways as it has unique values. Thus, for a numerical value the number of splits can be as high as the number of data points - 1. For a categorical variable, it can be as high as the number of classes - 1 (equally dividing any sequence of n will produce n-1 splits). An important and useful step is to sort the data along the variable of interest. In this way, the splits are self-evident. For numerical values, at each split, the values on one side are smaller, and on the other side higher of the split value (which is the average of the value in our data just to the left and just to the right of it). 
	 	
	Figure 16.4 - Computing the best split in our cancer data set for the variable 'gene found during screening'.	
For categorical variables, it will show where the class labels change. If we sort on 'sex assigned at birth' for example, depending on how we sort, the first n samples in our data will all be of label 'Female', followed by the remainder of the samples all labeled 'Male' (in the case our data only has two values for 'sex assigned at birth'). It is easy to find and utilize these transitions and consider them as splits. There is no point in splitting a categorical variable where the resulting two halves are not homogenous on that input variable. Such a decision is completely arbitrary and cannot be made again for new data. This luckily limits the number of possible splits to consider for categorical variables quite a bit. Before we start splitting the data, we need a baseline reading for the current Gini Impurity, which is easily calculated from our current sample using Equation 16.1. Note that this current sample can be the absolute starting point, in which case it is the entire dataset, referred to as the root. Or we can be somewhere further down the decision tree branches. In this case, we refer to current point in the tree as the parent node, with the paths created by splitting the data at the parent node leading to two new child nodes. 
	 	
	Figure 16.5 - Computing the best split in our cancer data set for the variable 'favorite color'. 	

For each of the possible splits, we compute two new Gini impurities, one for each of the two halves of the data generated by a specific split. These three values together will be used to compute the Gini Gain as the difference between the Gini Impurity at the parent (the data before it is split) and the weighted average of the Gini Impurity at both its children. It is a weighted average because it considers the number of examples in each of the two children. A very small number of examples in a split tends to inflate the purity. In the extreme, a sample only contains a single data point, which must have an impurity of 0. Clearly that is a bit artificial. The weighing of the Gini impurity based on number of examples shifts the average Gini impurity towards the sample that can more reliably estimate the impurity, which means it has more examples to do so with. The animations in Figures 16.3-5 visualize what the demo notebook is computing, for each of the 4 input variables, it also shows that the best split is found for the gender variable and has an information gain. 

	 	
	Figure 16.6 - Computing the best split in our cancer data set for the variable 'age'.	

 
16.7 - Entropy and Information Theory
An alternative to the Gini Gain is the Information Gain. Whereas the Gini Gain is based on Gini impurity, Information Gain is based on the measure of entropy. Since it is such an important metric, not just for decision trees, but throughout the field of data science, statistics, and machine learning (we will see entropy again in our discussion on deep belief neural networks), it is worthwhile discussion it in a bit more detail. Entropy has its origin in physics, where it describes the amount of
disorder or randomness in a system. It is key to the 2nd law of thermodynamics that states that an isolated system when left unperturbed by outside forces and energy will always arrive at a state of equilibrium, and greater disorder. Entropy is the measure of the disorder of a system. Entropy also describes how much energy is not available to do work. The more disordered a system and higher the entropy, the less of a system's energy is available to do work. An ice cube of each dropped in a pot of boiling water initially has available energy, in transferring the heat from the water into the ice cube and melting it. After a while the ice cube is completely melted and the system is in equilibrium, the temperature of the water doesn’t change. Physical systems always move in that direction of disorder (higher entropy) direction, and the process is irreversible, linking entropy and the second law of thermodynamics to the arrow of time. Later, entropy became the cornerstone of information theory, the scientific study of the quantification, storage, and communication of digital information. Here, entropy was used to the amount of uncertainty involved in the value of a random variable or the outcome of a random process. It has many applications across such disparate fields like cryptocurrency, compression, digital transmission of data, linguistics, etc. A popular description of entropy is the amount of surprise associated with some observation. If you are surprised about the observation, you will have gained some information about a system producing the observation. If you are not, you have learned nothing new, and now information has been gained between the time before the observation and the time after. A more scientific word for surprise is probability. If something has a high probability of happening, we are not surprised when we observe, and vice versa. This framework of being able to quantify the amount of information (regardless of what represents, like words, images, or stock market prices) is the work of Claude Shannon. He not only quantified information, but he also quantified with something our digital age is built on – bits. To compute entropy, we first compute the probability of observing each state our system can be in and multiple that probability with the log of the same probability. We do this for every state and add those numbers together. Multiplying the result with -1 and we have our measure of entropy, expressed in bits. 	 
	
 
	(16.4)
	Equation 16.4 - Information theoretic entropy is computed as product of the probability of observing each possible state of system times the logarithm of that same value, summer across all states, multiplied with -1 to make the measure increase with increased levels of information.	
To understand this equation, lets first look at what a single bit of information is. A bit of information represents knowing whether some variable took one of its two possible state. And entropy of 0 bits for a two-state variable means we are never going to be surprised, as the variable will always be in one of its two states upon observation. In contrast, 1 bit of information for the same variable means the maximum amount of surprise, the two states are perfectly balanced in their probability of being observed. So, imagine tossing a perfectly unbiased coin. Half the time it comes up heads, half the time tails. This means we have no way of predicting the outcome. And thus, every toss is as surprising as the last one. Using equation 16.4, we can compute the information, in bits as follows:
 

	
 
	(16.5)
	Equations 16.5 - Amount of information (in bits) gained from flipping a completely unbiased coin. Each outcome is just as likely as any other (pheads = ptails), which equates to the maximum amount of surprise possible. 		

At the other extreme, the coin always comes up heads. This edge case is not computable, as it calls for the logarithm of zero, which is not defined. However, if we were to compute is for a coin that comes up heads 99% of the time, we can see that the entropy nears 0, and can be said to be theoretically zero for the case in which the coin comes up heads 100% of the time, see Equation 16.6. 
	
 
	(16.6)
	Equations 16.6 - Amount of information (in bits) gained from flipping an almost  completely biased coin. The entropy nears 0, as an almost completely biased coin is unable to provide us with any new information. 	
But in between those two extremes, we can still express the information gained, in bits. For example, imagine a coin biased slightly to heads with a probability of 0.7. The amount of information is now:
	
 
	(16.7)
	Equation 16.7 - Amount of information (in bits) gained from flipping a biased coin. With unequal outcome probabilities, we just don't gain as much new information s with an unbiased coin. 	

We have gained some information, because there is still some unpredictability, but since it is more often heads., we are less surprised about the outcome in general and have gained less information that the completely unbiased coin. As you can see, Entropy doesn’t have to be an integer number, it can be expressed as a real number, well, even though bits themselves are 0 or 1. When variables can be in more than one state, the possible amount of information they can carry grows beyond 1. Another way of thinking about bits of information is how many I need to represent every possible state my variable can be in. For a coin that is unbiased, we need two states (one for heads, one for tails). For a coin that is completely unbiased, in theory I need no bits at all, since there is only one possible state. For a slightly biased coin, the entropy is between 0 and 1, meaning I still need one bit, since there are still two possible states. A more interesting example is the entropy of our alphabet as used for writing in English. Focusing only on the 26 letters, and forgetting about special characters, capitalization, and punctuation, what is the minimum number of bits we need to represent that. One bit allows us to represent two possible states. Add another bit, we have 4 possible states. To represent all 26 letters, we need n bits where 2n >= 26. In order words, we need to find n number of bits that can take on 26 or more possible states. That n is 5, as since it allows us to store 32 different states. At n=4 it is 16, which is not enough. Even though we can’t have fractional bits, we can use our formula for entropy to compute the theoretical number of bits needed, in terms of information. If all letters were equally likely, the probability of observing anyone of them is 1/26. Therefore, the entropy is:
	
 	(16.8)
	
Equation 16.8 - Amount of information (in bits) gained from observing the next letter in a string if that string was indeed completely random. In languages using a Latin-script based alphabet, like English, not all letters are equally probable. In addition, the sequence of letters is not completely random either. Some letters in the English are typically followed by certain other letters, and some letters will never be found adjacent to each other. 	

That number fits well with our observation on how many bits we needed to represent all the 26 letters: more than 4 bits, less than 5. However, we know the letter aren’t all equally likely. Observing an E is far more likely than observing a Q or K in English. Overall, our surprise in observing the most common letters is low, which we know should be associated with lower entropy. The table above has those letter frequencies and plugging them into equation 16.4 reveals that the actual entropy of the alphabet in English is about 4.2, less than if we had assumed the letters were all equally likely. It is however, still >4, so we will still need 5 bits to store all 26 letters, unless we start grouping letters into pairs. An important extension of the amount of information in a variable is mutual information. The Mutual information of two random variables is a measure of the mutual dependence between the two variables. More specifically, it quantifies the "amount of information" about one random variable by observing the other random variable. In other words, how much of my surprise of observing A is tempered by having already observed B. This is a useful metric in machine learning. If you can show the mutual dependence between variables, we have reason to believe we can build an algorithm that allows us to predict A from B, or B from A. That last statement is important. It is a mutual dependence, and we can’t make any statement about whether A is causing B, B is causing A, or something is causing both A and B to happen. Remember, correlation (and mutual dependence) does not mean causation. 
 

	Letter	Probability	Letter	Probability	Letter	Probability	
	E	0.111607	C	0.045388	Y	0.017779	
	A	0.084966	U	0.036308	W	0.012899	
	R	0.075809	D	0.033844	K	0.011016	
	I	0.075448	P	0.031671	V	0.010074	
	O	0.071635	M	0.030129	X	0.002902	
	T	0.069509	H	0.030034	Z	0.002722	
	N	0.066544	G	0.024705	J	0.001965	
	S	0.057351	B	0.020720	Q	0.001962	
	L	0.054893	F	0.018121			
	
Table 16.1 - Frequency of the letters in the English alphabet. Since not all letters appear in the English with the same probability, the entropy of letters in an English text is lower.	

16.8 - A deeper relationship between information and physical reality
You  might feel  like a bit of stretch to use entropy in two such seemingly different settings like physics and information theory, but in reality, in both cases they describe the same property of a system: its disorder. When the ice cube is dropped into pot of boiling water, there is still order and structure. Depending on where you look, you might see molecules bouncing off each other frantically, where in other places are barely moving. Like the famous quote: ‘life is a box of chocolates, you never know what ya gonna get’, a random sampling of some the water molecules in the pot at this point has some probability of being a molecule in the boiling water, or in the ice cube. Eventually, the ice cube has completely melted by heat transferring from the boiling water and with that heat dissipated, the water temperature is at rest. No matter where we look in the pot, you’ll see molecules bouncing around in the same way, there will be no surprises, and the entropy is at its highest. In physics, the notion of entropy seems to be at the heart of the reality of our universe and why it is the way it is (or better: appears the way it appears to us), from its relationship with the 2nd law of thermodynamics and how it explains the arrow of time. Whereas as traditionally the directions of space are thought of as symmetric, time is not. For some reason, the now appears to be constrained by the before, not the after. Imagine a teacup, smashed against the wall. There are an infinite ways that can play out. But in the vast majority, it will involve the teacup shattered into thousands of pieces. Yet nothing really prevents the atoms from somehow all ending up in the exact same spot, with the teacup unharmed as if nothing happened. Since there are so many more ways to be disordered, the outcome of any event will likely be a more disordered one. And disorder begets more disorder, and we find ourselves on trajectory with a fixed direction: the direction of time. The surprising theoretical link between the notion of 'information' and the physics of our universe has led some physicists to speculate whether information isn't ultimately the building of reality, given rise to such things like time, space, mass, energy, object, galaxies, solar systems, planets, humans, brains, ideas, etc. This idea, sometimes referred to as concept 'It from Bit' as you can imagine is somewhat controversial. But physics has shown many times over that was is seen as controversial doesn't mean it is wrong. Far from it.

16.9 - Information Gain in decision trees
The way we use entropy to find the optimal split of our data is highly like how we use the Gini impurity to compute Gini gain. First, we compute the entropy of the data at the parent node. Then, after sorting the data, we compute the entropy for the data on either side of each possible split. A weighted average, based on the number of data points in each split is computed and compared to the entropy of the data at the parent node, with their difference defining information gain. Note that we are aiming to lower the entropy. High levels of entropy means that we have roughly an equal number of data points for each class in each split. We aim to find a split such that both children are more homogenous than their parents, preferrable with all data points belonging to one class ending up in the left child node, and all the data points belonging to the other class in the right node. In the end, the results obtained using Gini Gain (using the Gini impurity index) and Information Gain (using entropy) are quite similar. Although when examined closely, the entropy measures provide splits of higher quality (and therefore accuracy), the Gini impurity index is easy and fast to compute, without any risk errors when taking the logarithm yields values smaller than machine precision or are simply not computable. 

16.10 - Building the decision tree
Regardless of your metric of choice, building a decision tree is typically a recursive algorithm, in which we continue to split a dataset up till a point where there is no more gain in doing so, or we simply run out of datapoints for a node to split up. The easiest way to implement a recursive decision tree algorithm is to use a stack, a  data structure designed to keep track of which nodes can still be split. 
We start by initializing our tree by creating a root node, which is given the entire training dataset, a matrix X with n data points and m regressors. We place this root node on our stack. We then continue process the data until the stack is empty, by taking a node of the stack, and the training data that was parsed leading up to it. Deeper down the decision tree, we will have progressively less data to train on since early branches have divided the data into one or more child nodes. With this data in hand, we then iterate over each regressor, and within each regressor we iterate over all possible splits. Having done so, we find the regressor x split combination which yielded the highest gain across all splits and regressors. We add this to the node as its decision rule and split data the accordingly. Two child nodes are created, each receiving one of the two new datasets generated by the split and put on a stack. On each subsequent iteration, if the stack contains nodes, a node is taken off the stack, along with its data, and the process of finding a split that yield a gain is repeated, generating more nodes. If the data can no longer be split, or any possible split on the data does not yield a higher gain, we stop adding nodes on this branch and backtrack by picking nodes of the stack that had been created earlier during growing the tree. We can also set a stopping criterium by not allowing the tree to grow beyond a certain depth. Once such a depth is reached, no more nodes are created underneath it. 

16.11 - Pruning
Pruning refers to the bottom-up removal of nodes, based on some criterium. Bottom up refers to the fact that we begin at the node terminals, nodes which have no children. There are many pruning algorithms out there; below are three examples of pruning algorithms. We feel that a deep dive into the pros and cons of pruning algorithms is beyond the scope of this course, but the reader can explore some of the reference materials we list at the end of this chapter. 

16.12 - Pruning by information gain
We can prune our decision tree by using information gain in both post-pruning and pre-pruning. In pre-pruning, we check whether information gain at a particular node is greater than minimum gain. In post-pruning, we prune the subtrees with the least information gain until we reach a desired number of leaves.

16.13 - Reduced Error Pruning (REP)
REP belongs to the post-Pruning category of algorithms. In REP, pruning is performed with the help of a validation set. In REP, all nodes are evaluated for pruning in a bottom-up fashion. A node is pruned if the resulting pruned tree performs no worse than the original tree on the validation set. The subtree at the node is replaced with a leaf node which is assigned the most common class.

16.14 - Cost-complexity pruning
Cost-complexity pruning also falls under the post-pruning category. Cost-complexity pruning works by calculating a Tree Score based on Residual Sum of Squares (RSS) for the subtree, and a Tree Complexity Penalty that is a function of the number of leaves in the subtree. The Tree Complexity Penalty compensates for the difference in the number of leaves. We calculate the Tree Score for all subtrees in the decision tree, and then pick the subtree with the lowest Tree Score. However, we can observe from the equation that the value of alpha determines the choice of the subtree. The value of alpha is found using cross-validation. We repeat the above process for different values of alpha, which gives us a sequence of trees. The value of alpha that on average gives the lowest Tree Score is the final value of alpha. Finally, our pruned decision tree will be tree corresponding to the final value of alpha.

16.15 - Combining decision trees - Random Forests
Random forests are an interesting extension of decision trees. Instead of building a decision tree, we in fact build  a large number of them, each from a random subset of the data (something we refer to as bagging). A so-called ensemble algorithm, rather than having a single tree predict an outcome, the random forest. Of many decision trees vote by committee, using a majority vote to determine the final predicted outcome. Interestingly, this often yields more accurate results. Using the ‘wisdom of the crowds’, the decision trees protect each other from making a prediction error. Decision trees can be quite sensitive to small variations in input, as a small outlier early on in building the tree has a ripple effects on the nodes below it, aggravating the error further. Thus, by building many such trees, each by using a random subset of the data, we mitigate this problem and instead assume that other trees will not have fallen victim to the small outlier of one tree. 

16.16 - Conclusions
Contrary to popular belief, decision trees do not strictly operate only on categorical variables or only operate effectively on categorical variables. It deals very well with continuous variables if it has two, provided it can make some assumptions about the distribution of such data. However, you will typically find decision trees in the context of categorical variables. We think this is in part due to the way decision trees allow us to see the decision process, almost creating a narrative of if/then steps that are taken at each branch. The AI, in a way, explains itself by predicting an outcome, something the other methods do not. One drawback of decision trees that is commonly overlooked, is the sequential nature of the process. By creating branches based on what feature is informative, we create paths that have access to an increasingly smaller data set, with no way of returning to reconsider early decision. Suppose I have a camera system in a lepidopterarium (that is Latin for butterfly conservatory). When a butterfly passes by, it records color, size, and overall shape of its wings. A decision tree is used to determine the species of butterfly. The decision tree finds that color is the most predictive feature, so it creates the first two branches based on that feature. The problem, however, is that the camera doesn't really compensate for ambient light conditions. As different times of the day, the color, to the camera, can vary quite a bit. Imagine getting the color wrong because of this. And further down the tree, you realize that given all the other features that are less predictive but easier to capture, you got the color wrong. Because no actual butterfly matches the shape and size available to you after you decided the butterfly was a certain color. And going back to reconsider is not technically a build-in feature of a decision tree. 

16.17 - Notebooks
The notebooks let you explore computing Gini Impurities and Entropy measures, as well as a basic implementation that builds a complete decision tree. It is a very simple implementation, on purpose, but can be tweaked, optimized extended as you see fit. 

16.18 - References
Ash, R. B. (2012). Information Theory. United States: Dover Publications.
Ananthaswamy, A. (2019). Through Two Doors at Once: The Elegant Experiment That Captures the Enigma of Our Quantum Reality. United States: Penguin Publishing Group.
Ferris, T. (2009). The Mind's Sky: Human Intelligence in a Cosmic Context. United States: Random House Publishing Group.
Maimon, O. Z., Rokach, L. (2014). Data Mining with Decision Trees: Theory and Applications (2nd Edition). Singapore: World Scientific Publishing Company.
Murphy, K. P. (2012). Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective. United Kingdom: MIT Press.
