Chapter 17 - Clustering	2
Clusters, the bitter cold and Emperor Penguins	2
17.1 - Introduction	2
17.2 - A geometric interpretation	3
17.3 - Distance revisted	4
17.4 - Distance metrics and the curse of dimensionality	7
17.5 - Distance to the waterpump - The Birth of Epidemilogy	9
17.6 - Clustering methodologies	11
17.7 - Exceptation Mazimiation - Theory	11
17.8 - Exceptation Mazimiation - Exceptation	13
17.8 - Exceptation Mazimiation - Mazimiation	15
17.9 - Distance Based Clustering - K-means	15
17.10 - K-means pseudo code walkthrough	16
17.11 - Metrics of success	19
17.12 - Silhouette Coefficient	19
17.13 - Choosing K to be the right number of clusters	22
17.14 - What is good for the goose is good for the gander	24
17.15 - Limitations of Distance Based Clustering Methods	26
17.16 - Distribution Based Clustering - Gaussian Mixture Models	27
17.17 - GMM pseudo code walkthrough	28
17.18 - Limitations of Distribution Based Clustering Methods	31
17.19 - Density Based Clustering - DBSCAN	32
17.20 - OPTICS	35
17.21 - Division Based Clustering - Hierachical Clustering	35
17.22 - Conclusion	36
17.23 - Notebooks	36
17.24 - References	36

 
Chapter 17 - Clustering
Clusters, the bitter cold and Emperor Penguins
17.1 - Introduction
Whereas classification is the poster child of supervised learning, clustering undoubtedly is the best example of an unsupervised learning task. Clustering aims at identiftying datapoints in our data that group together, and if so, along what dimensions or features. Even though it is an unsupervised methodology, that does not mean we can blindly press a button and expect good results. Different clustering algorithms work with different assumptions, so a good understanding of the data through careful inspection is always a good thing before committing to an algorithm. As pointed out earlier, traditional machine learning methods are gradually replaced by the neural network implementation counterparts. However, the underlying ideas, principles, and pitfalls remain the same. 
	
 	
	Figure 17.1 - Male emperor penguins survive the antartic winter by huddling together into tight clusters. Members on the outside are exposed to the elements and will push themselves towards the center, making each cluster move and spin around its axis. 	
Relying too much on neural networks to find a useful solution without a good understanding of the data, obscures serious flaws, biases, shortcomings and erroneous interpretations of the outputs. Clustering is not typically something neural networks are specifically designed for. However, depending on the design and archetectures used, they often allow us to see howa network, perhaps trained to perform a different task, was able to learn the task by grouping certain inputs together. However, given the large number of nodes of modern day deep beleif neural networks and the non-linearaties it can introduce between inputs and outputs, it is not trivial to unacpk in most cases how this clustering should be interpreted. As before, it is generally a good idea to start exploring a novel data set with some of the conventional tools, as they are easy to implement, and can already provide some keys insights. 

17.2 - A geometric interpretation
As with all machine learning algorithms, it is important to understand the geometry of the space your data lives in. Intuitively, we usually imagine clusters as a group of points a centroid, the origin of the cluster. What disntinguishes clusters from one another is defined as a relative dsitnace. It defines a cluster as a collection of points whose inter-distances (the distances between each point of the cluster and each other point of the cluster) is smaller than their intra-distances (the distances between the points of the cluster and points belonging to other clusters). A point is a member of a cluster if a) it's distance to that cluster is the shortest distance compared the distances of the same point to all other identified clusters and b) the point is close enough to that cluster. There are, however, other ways we can define clusters. For example, some algorithms (e.g., DBSCAN) consider clusters as regions of the data space where the density of points is greater than some other region or baseline. Other algorithms use graph centric approach and define clusters as data points that share a greater connectivity with each other than other parts of the graph. Different still, some algorithms use a distribution-based approach, with clusters defined as the maximum likelihood that a point was generated by one of a number of parameterized distributions. 
	 	
	Figure 17.2 - The distance between two points on the suface of a sphere is given by the haversine distance, not Euclidean distance. The shortest distance between points on a sphere (for example Madrid and New York) is not a straight line as it would be on a flat 2D surface, but rather a curved line. Displayed on a 2D map, the curved line looks considerably longer, but in reality the distance of the straight and curved lines is 5940 and 5570 respectiveily, meaning that curved route is about 370 nautical miles shorted. The projection commonly used to display the surface of our planet as a 2D map is the called the Mercator projection. Any projection from 3D to 2D will introduce distortions in some way, and with the Mercator projection this manifests itself in a stretching of the area around the poles. On the Mercator map, Greenland looks about the same size as Africa. But in reality, Africa is about 15 times larger than Greeland, in surface area. 	

17.3 - Distance revisted
We have already explored the concept of distance. Specifically, we showed that even though it might come natural to us to view distance in terms of Euclidean geometry, such a geometry can be misleading when applied to the space inhabited by our data. By approximation, Euclidean geometry is a useful and consistent framework for defining geometric relationships between objects in space. When you look up from reading this, you will see your surroundings as a space in which objects have a position, defined by three dimensions that are strictly orthogonal. And not only are they orthogonal, the are expressed in the same units. One unit of moving an object along one axis (say: upward) is exactly the same as moving the same object along a different axis (say: forward). As the dimensions of our data can 
	 	
	Figure 17.3 - The Levenshtein edit distance between two words A and B is the minimum number of invididual edits we need to apply to word A to turn it into B.	
be expressed in different units, we should be caitious to assume euclidean distance is the right metric. If you got to this point without having worked through Chapter 12, 
we would advice reading through it before contimiing here. In it, we give a few examples of why defining the correct distance metric is not alwats trivial, and requires some insights into the nature of your data. What is key here is that distance isn't a term reserved to refer to onyl (Euclidean) distances in space. Any distance, dissimilarity or simmilarity metric can be used if the data allows and calls for it. Even when Euclidean distance seems the obvious choice, it might not be. Yes, two cities are some euclidean distance apart. But the earth is a sphere, so the real distance on the surface of the earith is gievn by the harversine distance (equation 17.1) not euclidean distance. At relatively small disstances (e.g. New York City, NY  to Princeton NJ) Eluclidean is reasonable estimate. But take a flight from New York to Madrid in Spain, and it does matter how we compute the actual distance travelled (under the assumption you are not digging straight through the earth to get somewhere). This is why, eventhough Madrid and New York are almost at the same latittude (ie. distance due north from the equator), when you pay attention to your inflight monitor you'll see you almost fly over the north pole to get there. Why? Because on a sphere, that is actually a significantly shorter distance then flying due east from New York into Barcelona. But distance can take on a more conceptual character as well. For example, what is the distance between a misspelled word in some document and its correct spelling? For this we have a unique distance metric with the tongue twister name of Levenshtein Edit Distance. I always found it oddly satisfying that the metric for finding the correct spelling of an incorrectly spelled word was named after someone whose name must have been missiplled for him a million times: russian mathematician Vladimir Levenshtein. The distance between two words, rather than geographical location, is expressed as a function fo the 

	 	
	Figure 17.4 - The Jaccard index compute the ratio of non-overlapping elements in two sequences.  	
number of individual edits we need to make to the letters of the word, like removing, adding, moving or replacing a character. And even simpler distance metric can be defined for lists, sets or sequences of symbols. For example, the jaccard distance is typcially used to compare sequences, like a seqeunce of bases encoded as DNA on one of your chromosomes that together are considered to encode a single gene. The Jaccard distance looks at how many of the elements in the sequence do not match up between sides, compared to the total number of symbols in the sequence. For example, the sequece ACTG and AATG only differ at the second element in the sequence, so the Jaccard distance would be 1/4 = 0.25. Finally, cosine distance (or dissimilarity) considers points to be vectors originiating from a common origin. The more they point in the same direction, the smaller thre cosine distance. This has the benefit of ignoring that two vectors might have different lengths, but still point in the same direction. 

	 	
	Figure 17.5 - The Cosine distance measures the angle between vectors, ignoring any difference in length or magnitude between vectors. 	

17.4 - Distance metrics and the curse of dimensionality
A final thing to remember is that as we increase the dimensionality of our data space (by adding features) our distance metrics can be become less meaningful. This can affect our clustering algorithms substantially. Imagine, for example, a 100 dimensional space in which we have two vectors that are identical for 10 out of these 100 dimensions. In the remaining 90 dimensions, the two vectors each point in random directions. If we were to compute a measure of the difference in angle

	 
	(17.1)
	Equation 17.1 - The equation to compute cosine distance 	
between these two vectors, by using cosine dissimilarity, the 90 dimensions in which the two vectors are likely to point in very different directions will drown out and obscure the remaining dimensions for which the vectors have identical values. One way around this problem is to use dimensionality reduction, which we wil discuss in detail in the next chapter. A very similar situation occurs when most of the values are not  random, but simply undefined or zero. Such sparse matrices aren't uncommon inputs to your models. 

	 	
	Figure 17.6 - The recommendations you are offered on services like Netflix and Amazon are based on the likes and dislikes of people similar to you. 	

Consider Netflix for example. They recommond movies to you based on your simmilarity with other Netlfix users. If you and some other person have watched and liked the same movies, it is likely that a movie the other person has seen (and rated favorably) but I have not, will probably be good recommondation for me. In geometric terms my movie preference is decribed by the movies I have seen and rated. Anyone within some distance is similar to me, in terms of movie preference. But each Netflix user has only seen a small fraction of all the available content. The resulting matrix of users by movies (or shows) is thus very sparse. For example, since I am not being particularly a fan of reality TV, for anything that falls in this category, I am of little help to the algorithm in recommending it to someone else. In cancer research, such missing or unspecified values might simply reflect missing data for that particular individual. Family histories of cancer might be missing completely, or not trustworthy and too anicdotal to be considered valid inputs to a machine learning model. Such missing data can make it hard for studies to find suitable cohorts of patients, as the simmilarity in the population becones hard to define and compute in such a scenario. Luckily, there are methods of transforming these spaces to mitigate such issues, which we will discuss in Chapters 18 and 19. Here, we will focus on the data as it comes to us, with missing values or not. 

17.5 - Distance to the waterpump - The Birth of Epidemilogy
The concept of distance relative to some origin was key in the birth of epidemilogy. Outbreaks happen in time and space, with an infectious disease manifesting itself early on as unusual high number of cases in close geographical proximity of eachother, indicating some source or starting point of the disease, with cases clustering around it (initially). But we didn't always think about infectious diseases as clustering and spreading in time and space. Primarly because for a long time, we didn't quite understand that  a disease can be infectious and can that it usually spreads through some form of transmission (it appears that even after 2 yeards of pandemic, some still do not subscribe to this well established fact). Cue John Snow, not the wall defending hero from Game of Thrones but instead an obstetrician living in mid 19th century London. He believed that contaimined water was the cause of the cholera outbreaks thatr happend quite frequently in his city, contrary to the established idea that cholera and similar diseases were caused by 'bad' vapors or smells. He based this not on the knowledge that water can be contaminated with a disease, either viral or bacterial, because germ theory hadn't even been propsed yet at the time. Instead he based his theory purely vased on his obserfvations during a 1853 outbreak of cholera that kills hundreds of people. By interviwwing local residents and hospital staff in the neighborhod, he was able to create a map of the known cases. And in the very middle of this cluster of points was the Broadstreet waterpump. Lucklily, local officials were sufficiently  convinced and close of the water pump, and the outbreak quickly died out. It did not change completely how we now think about infectious diseae, contimantion and transmission, more research by those unconvinved by the established science was needed to do that. However, it is commonly seen as the ffounding event of the field of epideimology. In our modern world, with airtravel and other fast means of transportation, geography appears to be less important in the spread of an infectious disease, allowing Covid to spread so rapidly throughout entire world. In medieval times, the plague decimating the European continent, was moving much slower, gradually moving outward from its initial starting point. It could take week, months or even years before the plague had reached all the fartheest corners of the European contintent.

	 	
	Figure 17.7 - A map based on the research by Dr. Snow, with each dot representing an individual showing symptomps of Cholera. In the middle of this cluster, Snow argued, the culprit: the waterpump at Broad Street. Although he did not understand how the disease would spread through the water into the nearby human population, it was clear to him that some aspect of the water and pump were at the root of the Cholera outbreak. Sure enough, officials shut down the pump and the epidemic stopped shortly thereafter.	

17.6 - Clustering methodologies
Although distance seems like a natural metric to find and define clusters, it is far from the only approach. The many clustering algorithms you may encounter differ mainly in how they define what are cluster is. For some data sets, this is not necessarily all that relevant, as all definitions seem to apply to the clustering at hand. In other case, though, how we define a cluster really does matter on how well our algorithm can perform. Typically, clustering algorithms can themselves be seen as clustering into four main distinct approaches: distance, distribution, graph and density-based clustering methods. It is important to note that in all four methods, distance still plays a crucial role. As we redefine what a cluster is, based on our method, we also redefine the role that distance plays, as we will see soon enough. But even a density-based method still uses distance as part of its algorithm. To differentiate between these approaches, we will use the three algorithms most closely associated with distance, distribution and density-based clsuterin methods, which are K-means, gaussian mixture models (GMMs) and DBSCAN respectively. We will only briefly discuss graph based clustering methods, as they are discussed in much greater detail later on, in a chapter devoted compeltely to graph and network theory. Both K-means and GMMs use an iterative fitting method called Expectaction-Maximization (EM), whidh we introduce as part of our walkthrough of both algorithms. We will also work through a basic implementation of DBSCAN. After that, we aim to build an inutution of when one algorithm thrives and another fails miserable, using a few artifically generated datasets. In addition, we will discuss how we can compute meaningful metrics of performance and success, and how to set certain parameters to maxime such metrics. We wil finish up by briefly discussing some other tyoes of clustering algorithms you migght encotuner or would have a need for. 

17.7 - Exceptation Mazimiation - Theory
EM methods are used in many different contexts, outside of clustering, and outside of machine learning. Most noteably, they are found in the field of quantative genetics, which studies phenotypes that vary continuously (like height, IQ or mass) - as opposed to discretely identifiable phenotypes (like eye-colour) Previously, we discussed gradient descent as an iterative method to find the optimal paramters for a machine learning model. It allowed us to find such paramters when no closed-form solution is available. Similarly, the EM algorithm provides an iterative method to find the paramters on a statiatical model, when these cannot be estimated directly. When it comes to clustering, we typically assume that all the data has been generated by some fixed number of underlying processes (i.e. each cluster is the result of data generated by one process). But we do not know which data point should go with what process. This the unsupervised aspect that makes clustering very different from supervised methods like classification.

	 	
	Figure 17.8 - Our ingenious but severly flawed experiment had us collect plenty of data points, but no way of associating each data point to another variable of interest (sex)	
Imagine that I run an experiment in which I have a large number of people lined up to pass through some halfway with white walls on their way out. Before each individual enters, we given them a marker and ask them kindly to place a notch on the doorframe at their eye heihht. A notch obviousyl represents body height, falling a few inches short (the distance between their eyes and the top of their head), but nonetheless a good representaiton of their overall height. While I give out the markers, my assistant makes sure to log the sex at birth for each individual passing through. After a week of painstakingly measuring the height of each notch on the door frame after a large number of random people have placed them there, we are ready to do our analysis, comparing it with the sex of the person. It is only then that my assistant and I realize our big mistake. We actually have no idea who was responsible for each notch, for any of the notches. Normally, we would compute the mean height of the notches for the men and women speratelty, as well as the variance. But we can't. Because we don't know for any of the notches what the sex was of the individual creating it. This is the situation we are in when it comes to clustering. Expectation-Maximization asttempts to migitate this issue, finding a user-defined number of statistical processes most likely responble for the observered data. In our notch experiment, we would set this number of processes to two, one for each sex. If there is sufficient statistical difference between these two processes (i.e. on aveage men are statistically taller than their female counterparts), EM can help use estimate the parameters. It will not, of course, know what these clusters actually represent, just that they are different statistically. That is up to us as humans to decipher. 

17.8 - Exceptation Mazimiation - Exceptation
As the name suggests, an EM algorithm consists of two phases, expectation and maximaazation. Similar to gradient descent, we start with some random set of 
parameters, or perhaps some educated first guess. And like gradient descent, those intiital parameters do matter and can lead to very different outcomes. Therefore, running the algorith multiple times, under different intial conditions is always a good idea, computational resources permitting of course. The first phase is the expectation phase, where we compute the output of our current model, given its current paramters. For example, a clustering algorithm using EM will compute the predicted cluster label for each data point, given our current parameters. In K-means, these estaimted parameters are just the centroids of each cluster. For 
	 	
	Figure 17.9 - Multivariate Normal Distribution. In a univariate case, we can describe the data along a single dimension in our data by a mean and a standard deviation. If we are modeling a statistical process that generates data across multiple dimensions, like the 2D example in this figure, we need a vector of n means (n = number of) as well as a covariance matrix of n x n, capturing the covariance between each two dimensions. The covariance between the dimension and itself along the diagonal of this matrix is the variance of that dimension itself. 	
 something more advnacned like GMMs, those paramters describe the parameters of the multivariate normal distribution underlying each cluster. We realize that 'Multivariatae n ormal distribution'  is a quite the phrase to causally throw at you, the reader. Hopefully by now, you are familar with the gaussina (normal) distribution and its chararectistic bell shaped appearance. It is usually used in a univariate context. 
Univariate simply means the distirbution only captures the probably of observing a particular value along a single dimensions  (e.g. the probability of observing someon with an IQ of 140)., given that our distirbution is paramterized by some mean mu and a variance  sigma Multivarite gaussian/normal distributions describe the probably of observing values across multiple dimensions, for example IQ and SAT scores. To describe this distribution we need 2 means mu (one for IQ and aoen for SAT scores. But we need more thna just two variances. We came acorss this scenara in an early chapter were we obsefved that the dimensions our disttribtuion describes might not be indpendent from eachother. I imagine this is the case for SAT scoress and IQ, the higher the IQ, the higher the SAT score, on average. So, in addition to their own variance in isolation we also need estimate the co-variance between them. A multivariate norma ldistribution is thus parameterizec. by a vector of means of size n (n = the number of different dimensions the distrubtion describes) and a covariance matrix of size n x n, where the elements of diagonal represent the covariance of each dimension with itself, which is the variance. The off diagonal elements capture the covariance or correlation between each paring of 2 out of n dimensions. 

17.8 - Exceptation Mazimiation - Mazimiation
During maximization, we chnage our parameters based on the expectations from the previous phase. In the case of K-means, we would recompute the location of the centroids based on what data pints were predicted to be part of each cluster in the expectation phase. If these new paramters are still substantially different from the paramters we had in the previous phase, we return to the expectation phase, now computing the output based on these new parameters. We continue to cycle through these two phases until the change in our paramters falls below some threshold, in wghich case we decide the algorithm has converged. We realize that this is perhaps a little to abstract to really convey an intution of how this method yields useful results, especially without any visuals to help ther eader. Fear not, the next paragraph will provide such visuals in abudance. Not only to convey the intutition behind EM but also the geometric interpretation of the most widely used distance-based clsutering algorithm: K-means. 

17.9 - Distance Based Clustering - K-means
K-means is widely used as a first foray into finding and understanding whether your data shows some kind of meaningful clusterin. In part because it is easy to implement, and in part because it is a distance-based clustering method. As dixcussed above, in general we think of clustering as things grouping together in space (or time). We further typically assume, or at least have a hard not imagining that a cluster of points is somehat homoegnoius across its dimensions. If this assumption holds to some degree for the space our data lives in, K-means can be a useful tool indeed. Distance allows us to define more precisely what a cluster is and how we can quantify the amount of 'clusteredness' of our data. 

17.10 - K-means pseudo code walkthrough
The are a few tweaks to the K-means algorithm that improve on the algorithm's stability and convergence, but the following is the pseudo code walkthrough of K-means in its original form, using the expectation-maximazation approach outlined above. 

•	Parameters. Before we initialize the algorithm we need to set a few parameters. Most importantly, we have to choose k, the number of clusters the algorithm will try to impose on our input data. Strictly speaking, we could also define the distance metric used by the algorithm to assign cluster labels during the expecation phase, but we will use the most common one - Euclidan distance. 
•	Convergence and Halting. Second, we need to set some convergence criterium to halt the EM process. This can either be some fixed number of EM iterations, or a halting call when the change in the centroids from one iteration to the next falls below some absolute or relative value, or a combination of these things. A definitive convergence is reached when the expectation phase does not change how each data point is labeled. In this case it has reach a minimum, although it is not garantueed to be a global minimun. Inspection of the data after converngece, and reruning the algorithm seeral times with different starting conditions is always a good idea and will guide your understanding of the quality of the clusters the algorithm found.
•	Initialization. We will have to provide starting estimates of the centroids of the k clusters we aim to find. It is common to use random values for this, perferably close to zero (relative to the data itself). A good rule of thumb is to compute the mean and standard deviation across all dimensions of your data and pick random values within the mean +/- one standard deviation. This garantuees the randomly chosen centroids will by centered in your data space and relative close to the origin, relative to your data. It is a bad idea to set the mean values to the same value, like 0. If all centroids are the same, we run into issues during the expectation phase, as we cannot assign each data point to one and only one of the cluster centroids, as the centroids are the same. 
•	Expectation Phase. During the expectation phase, we compute the distance between each data point and the cutrent estimate of the cluster centroids. Data points are assigned to the cluster with the centroid closest to it. Should the assignment be identical to the previous step, we can safely halt the algorithm as it has converged to a local mimimum from which it will not escape. One problem that can occur during this phase is that, by chance, one or more cluster centroids are not assigned any points. This obviously causes problem in the next step, where we compute updated centroids from the points that were assigned to each cluster. If this happens, typically it is best to halt and start over with a new set of randomly chosen cluster centroids. If the problem persists, try lowering k. If k is too high, multiple centroids are essentially fighting over the same cluster, and if one of them wins, the other is left without any points assigned to it. 
•	Maximization Phase. After the points have been (re)assigned to one of k clusters, we compute new centroids, based on these new labels. Specifically, we compute the new cluster centroid from the average position of all the points assigned to that cluster in the previous expectation phase. If the (relative or absolute) change in cluster centroid falls below our convergence threshold, we can halt the algorithm and return the centroids. If not, we wil return to the expectation phase. 

And that is the entire algorithm, in a nutshell. It requires only a minumum amount of mathematical operations, all of them quite elementary. The algorithm is also linear, not recursive, and operates on the same data on each iteration, so it also easy to implement in most programming languages. For all its simplicity and ease of implementation, K-means does have its limitations, and we will discuss them later on. Figure two shows a slowed-down version of the algorithm at work. Specifically, during each update we only allowed the centroids to change as fraction of their newly computed location. Whereas under normal circumstances, the newly computed centroids would simply replace the current estimates, we made the update to be 80% currently estimate centroids + 20% newly estimated centroids. This has the centroids updaed by only. 20% their suggested change, but still in the right direction. This way, it is easier to observe the centroids moving into place, at the center of their respective clusters. 

	 	
	Figure 17.10 - Animation of K-means at work, iterating over the EM steps to find the 4 clusters. See the notebooks for much more detail on implementation	

 
17.11 - Metrics of success
Once our clustering algorithm convergences, there isn't a natural way for us to assess the quality of the solution (i.e. the clusters) it has found. Rebember that clustering is a unsupervised method, suggesting we do not have any ground truth data. However, it is possible that at least for some subset of our data does have labels. In these cases, quite a few metrics of clustering can computed. Mutual information, Completeness, Homogeniuity and the (adjusted) Rand Index are a few examples that give us some insight into the amount of clustering in our data. In the case of truly unsupervised learning, these metrics are of no use, as they all require ground truth labels to be provided for the data set at hand. With the exception of the Silhouette Coefficient.

17.12 - Silhouette Coefficient
AMongst the very few that have been proposed that are informative without the need for ground truth labels is the silouhette coefficient. For each point, the silouette metric computes the aerage distance of that point to all the points assigned the same cluster, designated as a. It compares this to the mean distance between the same point and all the points assigned the nearest cluster it is not assigned to, designated as b. The sample silhouette coefficient for that particular point is then given by equation 17.2, and can take on a value between -1 and 1. 

	
 
	(17.2)
	Equation 17.2 - The Silhouette coefficient for a points is computed using the average distance of a point to the points in the same cluster, compared to the average distnace of the same point to the points in the closest cluster of which it is not part of. 	

	 	
	Figure 17.11 - Synthetic data with four clusters was generated. In (A), the noise is kept minimal, and K-Means  finds and delineates the 4 clusters quite well. The resulting silhouette plot shows the individual silhouette values per data point, sorted first on the basis on what cluster they were assigned to (the four differently colored segments. Within each cluster, the silhouette values per data point are then sampled from high to low. High silhouette values for a particular point indicate it is very close to the centroid compared to the centroid of a closest cluster it was not assigned to, low silhouette values suggest it show like affinity to either the cluster it is assigned to, or the closest cluster it wasn't assigned to. The dotted line represents the average silhouette across data point, which at 0.72 is considered indicative of substantial clustering. In (B) we increased the noise substantially, and recomputed the silhouette values. Now, the average is 0.4, which it not great. However, due to the nature of K-means, some structure was imposed, which is why the silhouette values are not closer to 0. We do not the steady drop in silhouette coefficients, compared to the sudden drop in (A). A sudden drop suggest the clusteres have well defined borders, with only a few points falling in between clusters. This is not the case in (B).	
The closer to one, the better that sample can be said to truly belong to the cluster it was assigned to. At 0, the coefficient a point has no affinity with any cluster, or laternatively, there are no real cluster to be detected to begin with, all data points 
are uniformly distributed across the space. Close to -1, and a point can be considered to have been incorrectly assigned to a cluster, and insead belongs to the cluster closest to it that it was not assigned to. If we compute the average across all samples, we will get a metric that gives us a sense of the amount of clustering found across all data points, similar to what we computed ourselves in our discussion on defining clusters. The silhouette coefficient at the aggregate level should as close to 1 as possible, but highly negative values are no longer possible. Instead, the aggregate silhouette metric levels out at 0. This follows from the fact that perhaps one or more points were assigned to the incorrect cluster, but that we cannot assign all points to an incorrect cluster, because, when you think about it, would just end up meaning that they are in fact part of the correct cluster. We have simply swapped labels between clusters, the clustering is very obviously still there. Furthermore, you can really only assign a point to the wrong cluster, if there is clear notion of right and wrong. Without any kind of clustering, all points find themselves to be hopelessly unaffiliated to any cluster, which again averages out to an aggreagte silhouette coefficient of 0. These values are useful, at both levels. But the silhouette coefficient gets its name from a clever visualaization that instantly can convey how well the data was captured by the number of classes you the user specified before-hand. First, divide the sample coefficients across all data points into different bucket, depending on the cluster they were assigned to by the algorithm, next stort each bucket form largest to smallest silhouette coeffiecient. Finally concatenate these lists together and plot the entire vector (preferably as a bar graph). Figure 17,11 and Figure 17.12 show the resulting plots in a few edge case scenarios. In Figure 17.11A, we have very pronounced clustering, with exactly the number of clusters as we wanted to find. 17.11B shows data with lots of noise, and 1712.C and 17.12D are similar to 17.12A, but this time, we asked for too many (C) or too few (D) clusters to be found.The outline of the curve of each clusters ordered list of silheoutte coefefiecnts tell you in an instantwhere most points fall within a cluster. The silohettes of each cluster should look well defined, with most values leaning towards 1, only to have a few stray points at the end of the sorted ist that just happen to be a bit between clusters. An absence of this particular structure is likely an indication that there is, in fact, no clustering. Well, no clustering that was identified by your specific clustering method. As we will see very soon, the are pronounced differences in what type form or shpae of clusters the different algorithms can identify. Unederstanding your data, especially from a geometric point of view, helps you made an informed decision on whichj clustering algorithm to use.

	 	
	Figure 17.12 - Continuing in the exactly the same way as Figure 17.11, here we present two scenarios in which we set the number of clusters to be found to high (C) or too low (D). In (C) we notice that a real cluster that has been divided into two clusters by K-means has low silouhette values (see the blue, brown, green and purple clusters). This is to be expected, as in this scenario, points just can't be far from either centroid if two centroids were created where there was really only one. (D) We observe the same for when two real clusters are merged by K-means into a single one. In this case the centroid will fall somewhere in between the two actual clusters, This artificially inflates the distance of points to their centroid, relative to the next cluster they are not assigned to. As a result, the silhouette values are low. 	

17.13 - Choosing K to be the right number of clusters
In some, but not all clustering methods, we will need to specify how many clusters we expect to find in the data. our approach is unsupervised, it is very likely we don't necessary have a good estimate of what the real number of clusters should be for our data. So how do we determine, based on the output of our cluster algorithms, the number of clusters the data contains? Turns out there is an objective measure ofperformance we can use for this. After K-means has converged for a particular combination of user-defined K number of clusters and initial random starting values for the means of these K clusters, we can compute what is known as the cost. Perhaps somewhat similar to the cost functions we used in earlier chapter to perform linear and logistic regression and classification, cost in clustering (K-means for now) capture the difference between our solution after convergence and how well, in theory, we could have done. In supervised learning, like regression and classification, we can use the actual outcomes in our training data to compute this cost. In clustering, where we have no such outcome data available, we can nevertheless still define an objective optimal solution. 

	 	
	Figure 17.13 - Clustering Cost. As the distance between points and the cluster centroid increases, so do our cost metric. 	

In clustering we compute cost as the summed squared distance between all the points to their closest cluster center. This is somewhat arbitrary number, and depends on 1) where we ended up putting the clusters, how many points we had in our data, and the range of values on each dimesionsion of our input data. Therefore, for cost to be relevant, we will have to look at relative difference between te compute cost between different scenarios. Imagine first that we start off with a set of points for which half are extremely close to one or the two clusters we defined, and the other half very close to the other. We can compute the cost in that scenario, and compute to the cost we obtain when we start moving the points outward and away from their respective cluster centrpoids. In this case, we can compare computed costs, since all other things are held equal.

	 	
	Figure 17.14 - Initially, the number of clusters we ask for it too low. Increasing it will reduce the cost quite rapidly, but at some point the curve hits an inflection point and starts to decrease in cost much slower. This inflection point is typically a good indication of the right number of clusters supported by your data. 	

17.14 - What is good for the goose is good for the gander
The above figure shows a steady increae in cost as our clusters become less defined and points spread out outward from the centroid repreenting the cluster. It also shows the theoretical zero cost, where all points are equal to either centroid, something we do not expect to happen for real data, and something that wouldn't necessarily be all that informative if it did. But as luck would have it, the same relationship we observe between cost and clustering is found for instances where do not vary the distance between points and the centroids, but also for when we vary the number of clusters we specify as an input to our K-means clustering algorithm. In addition, plotting the cost as a function of the number we specifiy K-means needs to detect can help us determine what the optimal number of clusters actually is. We will use the scikit-learn make_blobs tool to generate data with n number of clusters to serve as synthetic input data to our K-means algorithm. When we have run the algorithm for a range of k number of clusters to be detected, we plot the cost as function of k and observe 2 things. First, the cost reduces monotonically the more clusters we ask K-means to find for us. This is expected but not very useful. More clusters centroids at various locations in our data space simply means that the data points are relatively close to at least one of them. What is of interest is the inflection point at about k=5. At this point the fast initial decrease in cost seems to more or less give way to a much slower second regime of decrease at a much slower pace. The inflection point gives this curve its name, as to some it resembles a hockey stick. For others, it is known as the elbow curve, for the reasons. What happens at the inflection point is that we have found, with some confidence, the correct number of clusters to look for in the data. Why does this happen at an inflection point? Imagine what was happening before we asked the right number of clusters. We asked for too few. That meant that two clusters that were seperated in the data space had to be lumped together as a single cluster. This means that for every k we add, we have an opportunity to break these lumped cluster apart into two or more separate clusters that are a much better fit. Now, most points will be much closer to their actual clusters centroid, whereas before, the cost computed used a centroid that was an average of the actual centroids of the clusters that were lumped together. However, after we have the correct k but keep increasing it, we are now essentially trying to break apart perfectly good clusters into subsets that make relatively little sense as being their own cluster. But the cost value will continue to drop, even though we have are moving away from the most optimal situation, because the distance of each  point to its subcluster centroid will always be smaller than the actual cluster that was used (incorrectly) to divide into two or more subclusters. However, dividing clusters that should not be divided (because we are now dividing a perfeclty well defined cluster), lowers the cost much less than dividing a cluster that should be divided (because it is actually two clusters). We could proof this mathematically, but instead encourage the reader to perhaps proof this for themselves. Not necessarily with mathematics, but perhaps by seeing the consistent patterns arise from appreciating the geometry involved in combining or splitting clusters in cases where we should or should not be doing that. 
17.15 - Limitations of Distance Based Clustering Methods
At this point it would appear we have a pretty solid algorithm, with some true objective metrics that allow us to assess the quality of the found clusters, and a way to optimize the number of clusters we expect our data to yield. However, K-means works well but only when the data meets its rather stringent assumptions about the underlying data. These assumptions boil down to three expectations about the data that we know do not hold for most real world data. First, K-means assumes that each point belongs to a cluster. Put differently, K-means will assign all points to some cluster, even if no clustering exists. Second, if clusters overlap partially, K-means doesn't have a way of expressing the relative probability of a data point belonging to each cluster. We can compute such a measure adhoc (e.g. the silhouette), but it isn't part of the optimization process itself. Most importantly, K-means expects our clusters to be spherical: the points of associated with each cluster are distributed around the centroid, with no direction away from the centroid being more or less likely than any other direction. Statistically, we have already seen many instances when this was not the case. As a matter of fact, our ability to build predictive regression models is the expectation that our data is not evenly distributed around some origin. Typically, a non spherical distribution will look oriented, showing a covariance between variables, in addition to the variance each variable has of its own. Such covariance is likely to exist in any data set we might consider. Demographic data will show correlations between race, age, income levels. Genes will correlate in the absence or presence, relative to some medical predisposition we suspect they cause. And nearby pixels in an image, whether that is a photograph or MRI scan will show siginificant correlations. However, K-means will struggle find clustering in such data sets. For example, each panel in Figure 17.15 clearly shows two clusters, even though they might appear elongated and rotated (middle panel), or have a particularly shape to them (riht panel. Despite the clear grouping in all three, K-means fails to find clusters beyond the symmetrivcal data in the left panel, for the many different initial randomly chosen centroids I have tried. 
	 	
	Figure 17.15 - Three sythentic datasets that clearly show clustering. However, K-means is only capable of dealing with the spherical and symmetrical clusters in the left panel. For orientated and correlated data, as well as clusters of a more complex shape, K-means is not the preferred solution.	


17.16 - Distribution Based Clustering - Gaussian Mixture Models
Ultimately, the failure of K-means to capture the clusters in Figure 17.15 is because it assumes the data is generated by a mixture of Gaussians, but each having the same proportion and variance, and no covariance. A failure of our data to meet these assumptions will render the K-means algorithm prone to returning poorly fitted clusters. The assumption of no covariance actually makes K-means a special case of the more generic method we will discuss here: gaussian mixture models. Like K-means, gaussian mixture models, as the name suggests, assumes our data was generated using a mixture of gaussian or normal distributions, each with its own mean vector and a covariance matrix. The mean vector represents the center of the cluster, and the most likely place to observe any data. Move away from the center, and the probability of observing points belonging to that clusters starts decreasing towards 0. However, GGMs also allow this not to be uniform in all directions away from the center. By fitting not just a mean or centroid, but also a covariance matrix, it can capture the distributions that aren't necessarily spherical but instead show a correlation in the values we observe in one dimension and some or all other dimensions.  

 
17.17 - GMM pseudo code walkthrough
Fitting a GMM is not very different than the algorithm we have already discussed for K-means: it uses expectation-maximization to iterate towards a hopefully global optimum where each cluster has a stable or unchanging mean vector and coviarnaace matrix from iteration to iteration. If this happens, we can stop iterating and return the most the results. The major difference between the two algorithms is how we assign each point to a cluster during expectation, and how we compute updated mean vector or centroids, as well as the clusters covariance matrix. 

•	Parameters. GMMs use the same set of parameters as K-means. Like K-means, GMMs require us to provide a target number of clusters. 
•	Convergence and Halting. Convergence and halting are the same as we discussed for K-means. The only thing to note is that given its higher complexity as a model, it is likely to take more iterations to convergence than K-means. 
•	Initialization. The mean vectors for each cluster can be initialized in the same way as K-means. However, it also requires us to provide an initial estimate of the covariance matrix. Here, we do not need to overthink things, the best initial covariance matrix is simply an identity matrix. From the perspective of multivariate gaussian models that are parameterzied by a mean, variance, and covariance, an identity matrix means that we have unit amounts of variance in each dimension (the diagonal elements) and no covariance (all the off-diagonal elements are zero). We have and will explore this relationship between variance, covariance and transformations furter in the chapters to come. The key here, again, is that all these things have a certain geometry associated with them. We hope that you will gain an intuiton and understanding of the relationship between 1) the variables in your data and how they migth correlate 2) what kind of coviarance this produces and how we can deduce this from looking at covariance matrix all by itself and 3) how this all ultimately translates into a visual rperesentation of the geometry of interrelationship between the data points.  
•	
•	Expectation Phase. Here, we see the first major difference between K-means and GMMs. Whereas K-means simply used (euclidean) distance between each point and the cluster centroids to assign points to their respective cluster, GMM will compute, for each point, the probability of observing a point, given the current parameters of the gaussian distribution decribing each cluster. In chapter 13 we outlined the equation (13.8) governing the gaussian (normal) distribution in a univariate setting (decribing the distribution of single variable, like IQ). The multivariate version (describing the distribtion of pairs of observations) is shown in 13.9.. The equation in 13.9 is for a multivariate distribution of 2 variables, and we can keep going with additional terms to ddescribe multivariate distribions of 3, 4, and any arbitrsru n number of dimensions. At this point, it becomes quite tidious to write out evetry term, so best to leave this type of work to extablished algorithms that you can find a numerical package availabile in most programming languages (in Python, both numpy and wscipy offer several tools to create and sample different types of multivariate distributions of arbirary dimensionality. Provided we have such a package available to us, all we need to do is to compute the probability of observing a particular point, given the paramters descirbing the distrbution. This yields k number of probabilities for each data point, one for each k-th cluster. We normalize the probability across all the clusters to sum to 1 before moving the maximization phase. Note that in Kmeans we went a step further and assigned each point definitivetivly to one out of k clusters. GMMs does not. Instead it keep track of the probabilities of each data point belonging to each of k clusers. For example, when k =4, we might observer that a data point, ghiven the current paramters has the following probability vector = [0.25,0.5,0.15,0.10].. Rather than thresholding this vvetor and sassigned the dat apoint to cluster to (with the highest probability of 0.5) we keep track of the probabilties acorss clusters, and use that additional information during the amximization step up next. 
•	Maximization Phase. During this phase we create new estimates of our mean vectors and coviarnace matrices. The mean vectors are computed as a weighted average  of our data and the probabilities of each data point belonging to each cluster. In other words: points that have a high probabiltyi of belonging to a particular cluster contribute more to the mean vecotr of that cluster, points with low probability contribute less, see equation 187.3 and Figure 17.3 If those probabitlities were all or none, meaning a data point was assigned aprobability of 1 of belonging to one clsuter, and zero to all other clusters, this computation is identical to the one used in K-means. Using probabilties rather than applying hard thresholding create a smooth and more stable descent towards a (global) minimun. After we have computed new esimates for our mean vector it is time to also update the covairance matrix of each cluster. We typically think of the coviarnace of a particular data set as some we compute across all avaialble data point in one go. Every point in the data suggests some type of covarince given its location relative to the mean vecotr, and by averaging all those data-centered covariances together, we obtain the covariance matrix across all data points. However, as was the case in estimation the mean, we want this new covariance matrix to ne weighted average. The way a single point contributes to the coviarnace estiamte of a cluster should depend on the probability of that point having been generated by that cluster to begin with. Thinkijng tfrm the perspective of a cluster, If you are farily certain a data points probably was generatedc by you, and not the other clusters, you should give that point a bigger influence in computed the covariance across all pojnts in the data. Points you eem the product of the generative process unerlying some other cluster(s), should not influence your estimate of your own coviarance structure.  Figure 17.4 shows the actual computation for a very small number of points from two underlying clusters.
 
	 	
	Figure 17.16 - Animation of the Gaussian Mixture Model EM process. Notice that it first settles on rough estimates of the means, before fine tuning the covariances. It is not a feature of the algorithm, it could very well have to do with the relative amplitude of the mean and covariance values. 	

17.18 - Limitations of Distribution Based Clustering Methods
We have now seen how GMM can come to rescue when K-means fails. K-means can't model covariance, where GMMs can. However, the gaussian assumption itself is not always a valid one. Although many things are, not everything in our world is generated by well defined gaussian/normal distributions. Intrecat patterns in our data might not represent a statistical process of a random variable at work. For example, look at the image in Figure 19.0 It is a horzontal cross section of a human brain, acquired using Magnetic Resaonce Imaging or MRI. Most of what you seen in this image is the brain itself. And most of the brain appears to be white, relative to a slightly dark thin edge along its perimeter. Thi swhite matter consists of the axons of the nerve cells (the long extension that reaches and connects to other nerve cells, where as the gray matter are cell the cell bodies of those same nerve cells. For many reasons, we would like to segment images like these so that each pixel is assigned as either part of the gray or white matter, or not part of either. And what we hope you can see is that there is definitely structure, but none of that structure seem to be generated by one or more clusters with some centroid. Let us simplify this a bit and turn to the next image, which represent a well known test data set to benchmark clustering algorithms. The two halve moons are clearly two distinct clusters of points. But interestingly enough, a large number of points belonging to cluster A are actually closer to cluster B. In addition,  the shape is more complex then we have previously allowed for. The distributions used in GMMs allowed us to squeeze, stretch, compress and rotate the hormal distributions. But it did not allows us to bend, twist, or otherwise defom the structure of the points beyond. What we need is to redefine what we consider a cluster, a definition that does not depend on some known statistical process generating our data, but rather a process that links points together based on density. If a data point happens to find itself surrounded by large number of points nearby, relative to other points who live a more isolated existence away from the points, perhaps it is juistified to identify that point as being part of a cluster, and that its nearby neighbors are part of a the same cluster. 

	 	
	Figure 17.17 - The same three sythentic datasets as Figure 17.15, now fitted using a GGM. The distribution based method does well with the left and middle panel data, but like K-means, can't deel with the more complex shapes of the clusters in the right panel.	

17.19 - Density Based Clustering - DBSCAN
The most widely used density based clustering algorithm is probably still DBSCAN, and perhaps the extension of it, called OPTICS. DBSCAN differs not only in how it defines a cluster, but also in what parameter are user defined. We hav eseem previously that both K-means and GMMs require us to provide the expected number of clusters, not something we might always have a good guess for. And even though we could try many different number fo clusters and look for the characterist elbow or hockey stick function, it still requires some guestimation. DBSCAN does not require us to set this paramter, but instead has us set to other values. First, there is the maximum distance (eps parameter) at which two points are still considered neighbors.  At difference larger than that distance, two points cannot be part of the same cluster (although that doesn't necessarily mean they are part of two different clusters either, as we shall see). The second parameter (minPts) is the monimum number of neighbors a point must have to be considered a core point. Core points are those points that have sufficent number of neighbors within the maximum allowable distance away from them. However, some points have some core points within the minimun the maximum distance given by the Eps paramter, but not enough to meet the minPts criterium of being a core point. 

	 	
	Figure 17.18 - Unlike most other clustering algotithms, DBSCAN not only assigns points to clusters, but also divides points into three classes: core points, edge/border points and outliers. 	
These are known sometimes as border or edge points because you will find points like these to represewnt the boundary btween what is part of a  cluster, and what is not. Finally, there are outlier points. These points are not close enough to any other point and are not considered part of any cluster. In this too, does DBSCAN deviate from GMM and K-means: the latter assigned all points to a cluster, no matter how impropable. The former can discard these points and their disruptive influence on our estimates of the actuall clusters that might be present in our data. Algorthicmally, it is a very easily algorithm to implement. Unfortunately, with this ease of implementation come issues of scaling and the curse of dimensionality. As our data increases in size and dimensions, exponentially more and more work is needed to count, for each point, its neighbors within some maximum distance from it. For every n-fold increase in the number of data points, we need to compute n2 more pair wise computations of distance. Nevertheless, it is a very useful algorithm in light of fginding clusters whose shape is perhaps its most defining feature. As long as there is some continious area in our dat aspace in which the density points is higher than some critical value we set, it doesn't really matter what kind of shape this area of higher density takes on. It can even be a picture of kitten. Since DVSCAN is not an iterative algorithm like the EM based K-means and GMMs clustering algorithms we have discussed already, we simply list the necessary operations as a walkthrough of how to udnersand and implement the algorithm. `In the right light, DBSCAN has many of the same feature sand assmptions we find in graph based algorithms that look for nodes wihin graphs that cluster. However, since grpahs will be discussed in great detail in alater chapter, we leave this statement as is for now for the reader to perhaps ponder on a bit, and pick it up when we start our discussion on graphs, networks, communities and cmponenents. 

	 	
	Figure 17.19 - The same three sythentic datasets as Figure 17.15 and 17.17, now fitted using DBSCAN. DBSCAN can find the clusters in all three synethetic datasets, but does require some careful tweaking of the eps and minPts parameters before it was succcesfull. 	

17.20 - OPTICS 
OPTICS extend the original DBSCAN algorithm, primarly to make it more optimal and less computational expense. If you find that a particular project on clustering you might work on our are assocaited with has a hard time geting DBSCAN to convergence within reasonable time, OPTICS might be of some benefit. Its increase in speed comes from ignoring the eps paramter altogether during run time, leaving some additional work to identify outliers and border points, after it has found the core points. 

		
	Figure 17.20 - Hierarchical Clustering	

17.21 - Division Based Clustering - Hierachical Clustering
The final clustering method that is quite different gfrom the previous three we discussed is the idea of hierachical clustering. In hierachical clustering, we use a divide and conquer approach to successively divide clusters into more smaller clusters. Hierarhical clustering can be imagined as both a bottom up or top down process, but is perhaps easiest explained using the topdown point of view. Becaus, hopeuflly, it will remind you of another algorithm already discussed previously. 
Imagine that you are an data engineer at Spotify, tasked to create playlists that people enjoy listening too. The problem is, some people has a very specific taste, and will onyl want to heat songs that are be classified as mongolian throatsinging speed metal (yep, that's a tihng. And to be honest, it is pretty rad). Other people are more flexible. They enjoy a wide selction of songs, provided those songs are in a 4/4 tempo. Anythin with a diferent time signature is out. Hierachical clustering starts with a predefined or precomputed set of clusters at the higest possible and still meaning full resultion. 

 
17.22 - Conclusion

17.23 - Notebooks

17.24 - References
