22 - Introduction to Artificial Neural Networks
Inspiration from Biology 

#h2 22.1 - Introduction
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) represent the latest and most promising way forward in achieving artificial intelligence through machine learning. Although they've been around since the 60s, interest in the initially in decline due to the success of more conventional machine learning algorithms of the time, and some initial theoretical concerns, as well as hardware limitations their implementation and size. But after a resurgence due to the availability of faster and specialized hardware (GPUs) and the resources and massive volumes of data put forward by the tech industry in need of faster, better more comprehensive model, ANNs are now considered almost analogous to machine learning. Specifically, deep belief neural networks have taken on very complex problems and succeeded in solving them beyond expectation. The phrase 'Team A developed a neural net that can predict X with remarkable precision' seems to be pretty much every headline on any tech news related media outlet. Inspired by their biological counterparts, neural networks offer incredible advantages over the traditional machine learning algorithms. There are some big pitfalls potential pitfalls that come with the ANNs. It is safe to say that for every strength ANNs have over conventional algorithms has an associated weakness that comes it. Unless we are cognizant of those pitfalls, results can be devasting, especially in a world where they are already allowed to make some many important decisions on our behalf. 

#h2 22.2 - Versatility vs the kitchen sink
Conventional algorithms we usually considered to be optimal for a particular problem. Although at the heart the mathematics were somewhat similar, early machine learning experts typically developed an understanding or even an intuition of which algorithm to use for what type of problem and data type. Some algorithms were specific to regression, others to classification problems. And some algorithms were specifically designed to work on a specific data type, like categorical variables, while other required numerical data. This is different for neural networks. By tweaking some of the internal meters and architectures, neural nets can take on any machine learning problem. Their inputs can be images, words, or DNA sequences, their outputs can be classifications, reconstructions, forecasts, etc. Simply by tweaking a few internal characteristics. Seems you can achieve a lot more, without learning a large collection of separate algorithms. However, with that comes the potential pitfall. By being so versatile, they can hide substantial issues in input/output data that any other algorithm would readily reveal. And it makes our combined efforts in working with and understanding these algorithms much harder. 

Figure 22.1 - The Kitchen Sink	

#h2 22.3 - Scalability versus a loss of insight
ANNs are extremely scalable, but with better hardware, so are other machine learning algorithms. Faster CPUs, more memory and other optimizations will typically contribute equally to all algorithm to work with more and more data. However, ANNs have another way to scale in depth. The term deep belief neural network refers to the fact a neural network has extra layers or computing steps in between input and output. One extra layer is good. Two is probably better. Three? Ultimately what the layers are adding is a level of complexity that the algorithm can use to express the problem: what is the best mapping between input and output data? Imagine that you see an image of an animal coming towards you with high speed. Your decision on whether to be happy (it’s a puppy) or run like hell (it’s a predator) depends on your categorizing that animal. But if the pixels in that image are all wired up directly two that happy/run signal unit, that becomes a very complex problem with probably no stable solution. Each pixel and its high bit RGB values now directly impacts the decision even though many of those pixels are irrelevant or just completely uninformative to predict whether they are part of a puppy or a tiger coat. Therefore, we introduce layers between input and output where the information is abstracted away from the pixels. First, perhaps pixels combine into blobs. Blobs come together lines or surfaces, these surfaces between different body parts, and finally these different body parts combine into an animal category. This scalability in complexity is an incredible powerful tool. And for that reason, it is also a dangerous tool. Because higher level of complexities makes it less and less clear what the algorithm is representing. It becomes hard and usually impossible to relate any set of input to the activity of these hidden deep and complex layers. It is only when they reach the end, where a prediction made by the algorithm seems to be aligned with what we expected and wanted the algorithm to do. 

#h2 22.4 - Flexibility versus bias
Very much related to the previous strength (and weakness) of ANNs is their ability to use highly unstructured data. Here, I use unstructured not that we do not know what the inputs are, but that their inputs can be highly variable between examples, but still representing the same thing that needs to be predicted from them. Think of all the possible photographs of cats on the internet. All the different shapes, sizes, colors, camera angles, etc. This was the major challenge not overcome by the traditional machine learning approach. As a result, a lot of work was invested into normalizing and feature engineering. Feature engineering will be discussed in detail later, but in short it refers to the human guided design of an initial transform of the inputs into a more stable or meaning one. A very simple example would be to subtract the mean intensity value from each input into a machine vision classification task, so that the algorithm didn't have to account for that fact that an object can be under very different forms of illumination. But far more complex things were introduced across many machine learning problems. And that was the task of the human engineers. So, it cost time and effort, and many times what worked in one problem, failed in another. Enter ANNs, because of the scalability, researchers realized they could be far looser with was offered to the algorithm going in. The deeper layers would just figure that out. Feature engineering was left to the algorithm, and the human could focus on designing and improving architectures instead. But at least feature engineering forced people on the problem to recognize and understand the very nature of the input data. A growing concern is that is powerful flexibility in inputs makes it easier for us to introduce skewed or biased data, and harder for us to detect we have. It is a loss of due diligence, and consequences can be very bad. We might simply not realize our data vary on dimensions we did not intend it to vary on. The ANNs is agnostic on what those dimensions are. Again, it simply finds the best mapping between input and output. But the 'best' mapping might be an unexpected, unforeseen, unknown, and most importantly and unwanted one. Biased algorithms are a huge problem in our society already, probably beyond we imagine. As a result, systemic inequalities in our societies are perpetuated or even exacerbated as we start finding ourselves more and more in a self-fulfilling world. An algorithm has learned that black people default more on loans than their white counterparts. This is true statement as a correlation. But not causation. Defaulting and being black are both caused by an existing inequality in race. However, the algorithm saw the pattern, and acted on it: it started denying loans more frequently and making it harder for them to get out debt, compared to white people. The problem continues, the problem gets worse. 

Figure 22.2 - At some point, the AI we create might have a few questions regarding ethics, bias, and morality to ask us as well.	

#h2 22.5 - The Quick History of ANNs
The preliminary theoretical base for contemporary neural networks was independently proposed by Alexander Bain (1873) and William James (1890). In their work, both thoughts and body activity resulted from interactions among neurons within the brain. For Bain, every activity led to the firing of a certain set of neurons. When activities were repeated, the connections between those neurons strengthened. According to his theory, this repetition was what led to the formation of memory. The general scientific community at the time was skeptical of Bain's theory because it required what appeared to be an inordinate number of neural connections within the brain. It is now apparent that the brain is exceedingly complex and that the same brain “wiring” can handle multiple problems and inputs. James's theory was like Bain's, however he suggested that memories and actions resulted from electrical currents flowing among the neurons in the brain. His model, by focusing on the flow of electrical currents, did not require individual neural connections for each memory or action. C. S. Sherrington conducted experiments to test James's theory. He ran electrical currents down the spinal cords of rats. However, instead of demonstrating an increase in electrical current as projected by James, Sherrington found that the electrical current strength decreased as the testing continued over time. Importantly, this work led to the discovery of the concept of habituation. The first step towards artificial neural networks took place in 1943, when Warren McCulloch, a neurophysiologist, and a young mathematician, Walter Pitts, wrote a paper on how neurons might work. They modeled a simple neural network with electrical circuits, which lay the foundation for computational model for neural networks based on mathematics and algorithms. They called this model threshold logic. In the late 1940s psychologist Donald Hebb created a hypothesis of learning based on the mechanism of neural plasticity that is now known as Hebbian learning. Hebbian learning is a 'typical' unsupervised learning. These ideas started being applied to computational models in 1948 with Turing's B-type machines. Farley and Clark in 1954 first used computational machines, then called calculators, to simulate a Hebbian network at MIT. 

Figure 22.3 - McCullough and Pitts. Together they laid the foundations for artificial neural networks and defined its various key concepts.	

#h2 22.6 - Perceptrons
In 1958, Rosenblatt created the perceptron, an algorithm for pattern recognition, based on a two-layer learning computer network using simple addition and subtraction. The most important contribution to the field by Rosenblatt is perhaps not the network, but the formulation of a learning rule that could be used to train the network on a set of input-output relations automatically. This learning rule would eventually evolve into gradient descent, which with some small variations is still in use in today’s neural networks. Research stagnated after the publication of machine learning research by Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert (1969). They discovered two key issues with the computational machines that processed neural networks. The first issue was that single-layer neural networks were incapable of processing the exclusive-or circuit. The second significant issue was that computers were not sophisticated enough to effectively handle the long run time required by large neural networks. As a result, neural network research slowed until computers achieved greater processing power. There was an understanding that the former problem could easily be solved by introducing intermediate or hidden layers beyond the input/output layers on Rosenblatt’s perceptron, but there were no algorithms that could apply Rosenblatt’s learning rule to update the weights in such multilayer networks. This changed with the creation of the backpropagation algorithm by Werbos in 1975. From then on, there was a renewed interest in neural networks, helped by ever more powerful hardware that could be used to simulate them. Similarly, the creation of the internet provided rich data sets at a scale, needed, and required to build useful neural networks for image classification and NLP models. The term deep belief neural networks were introduced, with important contributions from both Yann LeCunn, Geoff Hinton and their students paving the way for the highly complex neural networks we build and use today for an increasingly larger set of tasks. A quick note here on the difference between Rosenblatt’s learning rule and its more general form of gradient descent and back propagation. The learning rule computes the change in the weights that need to be applied to train the network, based on the error between its current output and some ground truth (the expected or desired output). Back propagation is the algorithm that propagates this change in weights backwards through the network, computing how much the weights of each connection contributed to the error seen in the output and adjusted those weights accordingly.

Figure 22.4 - Frank Rosenblatt, pioneer in the field of artificial neural networks	

#h2 22.7 - Biological Neural Networks
Artificial neural networks are of course inspired by their biological counterparts. The functional unit of a biological neural network (that is: our brains, spinal cord, and all nerves throughout the body) is the neuron. The neuron is a cell with a very specific function: to receive and transmit distal information. All cells in our body communicate with each other in some respect through chemical processes, but these are extremely local. It is the neurons that bring the information from your little toe all the way up to your brain. Roughly speaking, we divide all neurons into 4 classes. There are the specialized neurons in our sense organs: they receive information from the physical outside world and turn them into the electrical signals used throughout the brain, a process called transduction. These include photoreceptors, the hairs in our inner ear, and touch receptors in our skin. On the other side we have the neurons who send signals to our muscles to make us move. In between them sit most of all neurons: the cortical interneurons. Although they do come in different flavors, most of our cortex is remarkably similar in structure and the type of neurons it contains. All of them communicate through a combination of chemical and electrical processes, taking in inputs from other neurons and if conditions are met, sending outputs to a third set of neurons. The fourth class is a group of other highly specialized cells in our brain that are evolutionary older and have very specific tasks, but we can ignore these in for our current discussion. People love to throw a statistic around regarding the number of neurons and the number of connections between them. Although it is true that humans have millions of neurons, we also know that the brain is far from fully connected. Meaning that most neurons only connect to moderate number of other neurons, both in terms of inputs and outputs. 

#h2 22.8 - The Neuron
The neuron consists of three parts: dendrites, cell body and axon. The dendrites are a branch like structure that are receiving the input from other cells. The cell body integrates the information received from these dendrites and if certain conditions are met, generates an action potential. An action potential is a brief pulse of electricity that travels outward through the third structure called the axon. In doing so, it activates the dendrites of other neurons that are attached to the end of this axon. The dendrites and axons do not physically touch. Instead, the signaling between them is done by means of neurotransmitters. The action potential causes the axon to release neurotransmitter into the gap between axon and dendrites, and the dendrites can detect this. 

Figure 22.5 - Schematic of the interneuron, the most common neuron found in the mammalian brain	

#h2 22.9 - Pathways and centers
The neurons aren’t randomly connected. Throughout the brain we find clusters of neurons that all seem to be respond to some type of stimulus or action. The location of these areas is quite similar between individuals. The first true understanding of localization of function came through the work of Broca, who noticed that soldiers that we shot in one area of the brain suffered from a specific aphasia: an inability to understand human speech, although it was clear they could still hear the sound. Broca’s area, as it now called, is one of many uniquely specialized areas found in almost all individuals and almost always in the same location, relative to other functional and anatomical landmarks. When I was in college, the latest addition to this list was the human fusiform face area: small area that appeared to be activation only by seeing a human face, but not much else. In addition to the centers, areas, or regions, we also particular patterns of connectivity between them. These pathways also seem to be specialized in their function as they join areas that all combine to more conceptual sense of function. For example, the human visual system seems to split up into two pathways. The ventral pathway seems to primarily concern itself with the detection and classification of objects in our visual world. Tools, people, animals, etc. On the other hand, the dorsal pathway is more concerned about the spatial configuration of these object, relative each other, and relative to us. 

Figure 22.6 - At the mesoscopic level, the human brain divides into distinct anatomical and functional areas, as demonstrated by Brodmann	

#h2 22.10 - References
Gurney, K. (2018). An Introduction to Neural Networks. United States: CRC Press.
Hebb, D. (2005). The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological Theory. United Kingdom: Taylor & Francis.
Mack, S. H., Kandel, E. R., Koester, J. D., Siegelbaum, S. A. (2021). Principles of Neural Science, Sixth Edition. United States: McGraw-Hill Education.
Minsky, M. (1988). The society of mind. United Kingdom: Simon & Schuster.
Rosenblatt, F. (1962). Principles of Neurodynamics: Perceptrons and the Theory of Brain Mechanisms. United States: Spartan Books.
Russell, S., Norvig, P. (2016). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. (n.p.): CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.
