25 - Introduction to Biological Vision
Photoreceptors, neurons, pathways, and receptive fields
25.1 - Introduction
To the fully appreciate the innovation convolutional neural networks introduced, it is a good idea and look at the machinery they were ultimately designed to mimic: the human visual system.

	 	
	Figure 25.1 - Human vision serves as the paradigm for our understanding of perception and cognition, as well as guiding efforts in attempting to build AI that can mimic its abilities. 	

25.2 - The Retina
Vision starts when light enters the eye and passes through the retina containing large number of photoreceptors. In absolute darkness, photoreceptors cells are polarized, meaning that there is a difference in voltage inside the cells, relative to outside of it. Photons colliding with a photoreceptor are absorbed by it, causing a chemical reaction that depolarizes the cell slightly. And the more photons are absorbed, the more the cell depolarizes and the long it remains in that state. When the stream of photons stops, the cell will return to its original polarized state. The depolarization of the cell reduces the amount of neurotransmitter it releases. This change in neurotransmitter is detected by the cells connected to photoreceptors: the bipolar cells. Already in this stage do we see a form of neural computation arise, as many photoreceptors project to a single bipolar cells. Projecting is the terminology used to describe how one neuron or group of neurons (B) is connected anatomically and therefore functionally to another neuron or groups of neurons A, with activity (and thus information) flowing from A to B. Any activity generated by A has the potential to generate sufficient activity in B. Or, in other words, A projects to B. When many photoreceptors project to single bipolar cell, this is of course not random. Bipolar cells receive inputs from photoreceptors that are clustered together. And if photoreceptors cluster together, they receive photons all coming from roughly the same direction. In other words, those photoreceptors are sensitive to a particular location within the large image of what the eyes are looking at. The bipolar cells thus can be said to already compute spatial average across the photoreceptors, presumably to reduce the noise across the photoreceptors. In turn, the bipolar cells project to ganglion cells which also pool together the activity from many bipolar cells. However, unlike the simple spatial averaging the bipolar cells performed, the ganglion cells create the fundamental building block of vision: the ON/OFF cells. It is the first time in vision where we a relative response, rather than an absolute one. ON/OFF ganglion cells combine photoreceptors in such a way that they compare the positive input at the center with the negative input of the area around it (called the surround). Light hitting the surround will make the ganglion less activity, light hitting the center will make  it more activity. Therefore, to get the maximum response out of the cell, we should therefore only present light to the center, and not the surround. What does that look like? It will look like a small bright dot on a darker background. For all practical purposes, the ganglion are dot detectors. The representation of the stimulus that will yield a maximum response is called the receptive field. Also note that for every ON/OFF center-surround ganglion cell, there is probably an OFF/ON center-surround ganglion cells as well, responding optimally to the same stimulus, but inverted. 

	 	
	Figure 25.2 - The retina already augments incoming information by combining and aggregating signals to enhance and sharpen the response of the photoreceptors.	

25.2 - The visual field and what you think you see, but you do not.
This large image of what you can see at any given time is called the visual field. As you a reading this, your eyes are continuously looking directly at (called fixating) on each word in turn. The area directly around your point of fixation has the highest resolution and it called the fovea. This higher resolution is the result of photoreceptors being far more densely packed on the retina at that location. Outside of that is the periphery, where the resolution is quite a bit lower, corresponding with a much lower density of photoreceptors. We typically don’t even notice this, but the different is quite substantial. Even more so, outside the fovea there is hardly any color vision, although we perceive the world in full color. The human visual system is extremely adept in filling in the blanks if it doesn’t have the necessary information as inputs. Perception in general is very creative process. The brain often needs to resort to defaulting to a best guess, because the incoming data is noise, incomplete and ambiguous. To give you at least one dramatic example of this, consider the phenomenon of change blindness. In a simple experiment unsuspecting subjects were directed to a desk to get a form. They interact with the person at the desk asking for the form. Supposedly ducking down to grab the form, that person quickly switches places with a different person who emerges to hand the subject the form. This second person is in no way a lookalike of the first person. They wear different clothing and might even be different gender or race. Still, most people simply do not notice that a different person is handing them the form. See if you can spot the difference between the two images flashed below. 

	 	
	Figure 25.3 - Change Blindness. Try to detect the change between each two successive images	

25.3 - Lateral Geniculate Nucleus 
After these initial stages of detection and local processing, the ganglion cells project to an area quite a bit away in the center of the brain called the thalamus. A likely evolutionary precursor of the cortex around it, the thalamus is located both anatomically and functionally at the center of the brain. All our sensory systems project to it and through, except for olfaction (which is an even older system, in evolutionary terms). In addition, together with the hypothalamus near it, it controls many aspects of our physiology. All the ganglion cells axons project out from the retina towards the thalamus are collective referred to as the optic nerve, and since we have two eyes, two optics nerves project towards the thalamus, and specifically within the thalamus called the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN). The LGN is a bilateral structure. This means that you have two of them, each one on side (left/right) of your thalamus. You might think that the optic nerve from the left eye project to the LGN on the left, and the right optic nerve to the right LGN. This is not the case, and it reveals some clever wiring built into the system. Some of the ganglion cells project to the LGN on the same side, while the others project to the LGN on the other side. More specifically, ganglion cells emerging from the left side of your left eye project to the right LGN, as do ganglion cells emerging from the left side of your right eye. And all the ganglion cells originating from the right side of both your left and right eye project to the left LGN. This clever crossing over regroups the ganglion cells. Before they were grouped together based on eye of origin. Now, they are grouped based on the side of your visual field they originated from. Facing forward, our eyes pretty much see the same thing. However, stereoscopic depth comes from the small differences in how the eyes see the same thing from a slightly different angle. This means to make use of this information; at some point you must have the information of both eyes together in one place. That is one reason for this rewiring. The other point is functional relevance. Again, both eyes see the same thing. What really matters is where things are in visual field because that indicates where things are in space, relative to us. It therefore makes far more sense to group visual information based on the proximity in space, than eye of origin. You might wonder why the information from the right visual field ends up on the left side of the brain. This cross over is not unique to vision, it happens with all our senses (expect olfaction). What you hear with your left ear is initially processed solely by the right side of your brain. In later stages, information is shared between both sides of your brain by ways of the corpus callosum, a massive bundle of nerve fibers projecting in both directions, allowing for information to move between hemispheres (your cortex is divided into two hemispheres, the left and the right). 

	 	
	Figure 25.4 - The visual pathway. Signals from both eyes are carried through the optic nerves to the lateral geniculate nucleus before projecting to the primary visual cortex	

25.4 - Primary Visual Cortex – Individual neurons
After some additional center-surround processing, neurons in the LGN project to the primary visual cortex, a large stretch of cortex all the way in the back of your head. That’s where the cortex takes over and starts building on the initial ON/OFF center surround inputs it receives. The study of the functional organization of the visual system really started with the groundbreaking work by Hubel and Wiesel, work that would earn them a Nobel prize in physiology. By carefully recording from a cat’s neurons in the feline equivalent of the primary visual cortex, Hubel and Wiesel identified several specialized cells that clearly function as building blocks for more complex system being able to detect and recognize more complex visual scene. Shining a bright light on a screen the cat was looking at while simultaneously recording the activity of a neuron, they were able to map out how the shape, position, orientation, and location of that light on the screen generated or more less activity. The clever bit is that they move the light freely and were able to adjust its size and shape. Specifically, they were able to create a rectangular shaped pattern of light, which they could then rotate and move as they wanted. When they did so, they found that some cells were pretty much silent for most of the time, expect for when a) the bar was at a particular position on the screen, b) at a particular angle of rotation. These are known as orientation selective cells. 

	 	
	Figure 25.5 - Thorsten Wiesel and David Hubel. Their work on the selectivity of neurons in the visual system of cats earned them the Nobel prize for physiology or medicine	

In addition, there was a spatial window in which this response was observed. If the bar was too wide, the cell stopped responding. They cells had inherited the center-surround characteristics of their inputs. Some cell preferred a light patch flanked by darker patches, whereas other cells preferred the opposite. In machine vision detecting to such an abrupt change in the gradient of light is an edge detector, the place where the image suddenly changes in brightness. If the cell likes a pattern of dark/bright, but not the other way round, it is referred to as a simple cells. Cells of opposite dark/bright preference then combine by projecting to a third cell which becomes agnostic or invariant to the ordering and will respond to both, provided the pattern of dark/bright is at or close to the preferred orientation of the cell. 

	 	
	Figure 25.6 - Neurons in the primary visual cortex selectively combine inputs originating from the retina into more complex structures like edges	

25.5 - Primary Visual Cortex – Organization
The relative position of the photoreceptors in the retina is preserved through the LGN and into the visual system, starting with the primary visual cortex. That means that neuron in the primary visual cortex that are nearby on the surface of the cortex receive inputs from photoreceptors that are nearby on the retina. This means that the primary visual cortex has directed mapping of its surface to the visual world. This is called a retinotopic map. This map is distorted quite a bit, relative to the sensor of a digital camera. For one, the cortex has lots of folds and is not a flat surface to project on. But more importantly, there is a stretching out of the map. Remember that there far more photoreceptors in the fovea. This requires more neurons and therefore more space in the cortex. 

	 	
	Figure 25.7 - The primary visual cortex (and several cortical areas beyond it) has a retinotopic map of our visual world. What is close together in our visual world is processed closer together in cortical space. The image shows the result of a typical retinotopic mapping experiment. Human subjects are shown high contrast stimuli differing in eccentricity and polar angle. The resulting activity associated with such stimuli shows a clear radial (eccentricity) and polar organization.	

25.6 - Beyond the Primary Visual Cortex
The primary visual cortex, also known as V1, primarily projects to two areas. The first is the secondary visual cortex, aptly called V2. In addition, it projects to an area called MT (short for medio-temporal visual area). V2, in turn, projects to V3, V3 into V4. All these areas are still retinotopically organized, but the receptive fields of what activates the neuron is getting bigger. In other words, the neurons become less sensitive to where the visual stimulus that activates them is located within the visual field. In terms of selectivity, we also see an increase in the complexity of what neurons are optimally tuned for (i.e., elicit the greatest response). Whereas V1 concerned itself with lines, corners, and edges, V2 already show sensitivity of complex patterns and textures. 

	 
 	
	Figure 25.8 - After the primary visual cortex (V1) neural signals based in visual inputs diverge into a host of secondary and tertiary areas, some of which with clear specialization like color, motion, depth, to name but a few.	

This increase in both complexity and receptive field size continues throughout the visual system. From V4, some neurons project to area IT, where selectivity to complete objects begins of develop. In humans, area IT consists of many different subregions. One of them, the fusiform face area, specialized in detecting human faces, but not much else. The route from V1 to IT is referred to as the ventral pathway and appears to be specialized in object detection and recognition. The other route, which has V1 project through V2, V3, V7 and then into parietal cortex is dedicated to understanding the spatial configuration of objects relative to us. Finally, the direct connection between V1 and area MT is highly specialized in detecting all kinds of motion of objects in our visual field. After some time, it becomes harder to strictly refer to the areas as purely visual, as other sensory modalities can also change the activity of the neurons. This closely follows the blurred conceptual line from perception to cognition. Through the series of projection starting from the retina, the selectivity or tuning of neurons becomes more abstract and conceptual. 

25.6 - References
